docs(MADR): naming system envoy resources (#13783)
kumahq/kuma: docs/madr/decisions/074-naming-internal-envoy-resources.md

# Standardized Naming for internal xDS Resources

* Status: accepted

Technical Story: https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/13266

## Context and Problem Statement

We use resource names to identify listeners, clusters, routes, virtual hosts and secrets in the xDS APIs.
These names appear in metrics, logs, and debug endpoints (config_dump), and they are often used for monitoring, filtering, and diagnostics.

> It's important to know the difference between internal resources (the ones that are defined by Kuma itself, and they usually do not concern the end users) and external resources (the ones that are defined indirectly by the user and the users are interested in).

Reviewer: nit: calling them "external" doesn't feel right, maybe "internal" and "user-defined"?

For example, clusters like `kuma:envoy:admin` or `_kuma:dynamicconfig` are internal to Kuma, while `kri_msvc_mesh-1_us-east-2_kuma-demo_backend_httpport` cluster is an external resource.

Currently, there is inconsistency in how these resource names are formed, some of them have a `_kuma` prefix, some of them just contain `kuma` and some are free form.

Some internal resources do not map clearly to Kuma resources in the data store, making it difficult to relate metrics to Kuma abstractions.

There are also resources that are in a bit of a gray area, like `meshtrace_datadog` which is a cluster created for `MeshTrace` policy.
It seems internal, but it could be traced down to MeshTrace resource `kri_meshtrace_mesh-1__kuma-system_my-meshtrace_`.

> #### Examples of kuma resource names

Reviewer: It looks like a full list of internal resources, or some internal resources are missing? If it's full list then I'd replace the word "Examples" and call it "Internal Kuma resources". It makes it sound like a list you can work on

Author: I did not find more but you know how it is - there could be something dynamically defined that is triggered by some specific setting.

  - virtualInbound

## Use cases

### Looking at a resource name I want to easily relate it to Kuma concepts

### As a user I want my MeshProxyPatch to continue working after the change

I don't think that's going to be possible.
In MeshProxyPatch you can use `name` matcher to match a resource name but if we change the name of the resource, it will not match anymore.

### As a user I want to easily exclude all stats related to internal resources from a query

So instead 

``` 
sum:envoy.cluster.upstream_rq.count{!envoy_cluster:kuma_readiness , !envoy_cluster:access_log_sink , !envoy_cluster:meshtrace_datadog}.as_count()
```

we can do:

``` 
sum:envoy.cluster.upstream_rq.count{!envoy_cluster:_kuma*}.as_count()
```

**Is this a valid use case if we have profiles in MeshMetric?**

### As an operator I want to drop all stats related to internal resources

So I can use a processor like:

```yaml
processors:
  filter/drop_kuma_internal_clusters:
    metrics:
      include:
        match_type: regexp
        metric_names: [".*"]  # apply to all metrics
        attributes:
          - key: envoy_cluster
            value: "^_.*"  # matches if envoy_cluster starts with _
```

> **Is this a valid use case if we have profiles in MeshMetric?**

Reviewer: I think with profiles you're just shifting the complexity of maintaining the list of internal resources to a different place. So it's still a valid use case

It's important to know the difference between system resources (the ones that are defined by Kuma itself, and they usually do not concern the end users) and user resources (the ones that are defined indirectly by the user and the users are interested in).
For example, clusters like `kuma:envoy:admin` or `_kuma:dynamicconfig` are system resources, while `kri_msvc_mesh-1_us-east-2_kuma-demo_backend_httpport` cluster is user resource.

Currently, there is inconsistency in how these resource names are formed, some of them have a `_kuma` prefix, some of them just contain `kuma` and some are free form.

Some internal resources do not map clearly to Kuma resources in the data store, making it difficult to relate metrics to Kuma abstractions.

There are also resources that seem to be in a bit of a gray area, like `meshtrace_datadog` which is a cluster created for `MeshTrace` policy.
It could be traced down to MeshTrace resource `kri_mtr_mesh-1__kuma-system_my-meshtrace_` and if a cluster operator has problems with tracing collection it might be something to look at.

To make it easier to distinguish between the two types we introduce the following definition:

> - **User resource** - any resource that comes from `Mesh*Service` and `Mesh*Route` definition

Reviewer 2: I think in the future we might also have Secrets: since we should probably name it based on MeshIdentity resource. In case of Spire resource name is SPIFFEID

Author: I think it's the same thing as a cluster for `MeshTrace` - what do others think?

Author: 1. SPIRE = no choice (spiffe ID / trust Domain)
2. Not SPIRE
  1. we can't do KRI because it's a combo of multiple all the MeshTrusts
  2. For MeshIdentity we could use KRI (future)
  3. For current `system_<category>_<scope>_<identifier>
  4. For user defined secrets we can use KRI

There are also resources that seem to be in a bit of a gray area, like `meshtrace_datadog` which is a cluster created for `MeshTrace` policy.
It could be traced down to MeshTrace resource `kri_mtr_mesh-1__kuma-system_my-meshtrace_` and if a cluster operator has problems with tracing collection it might be something to look at.

To make it easier to distinguish between the two types we introduce the following definition:

- **User resource** - any resource that comes from `Mesh*Service` and `Mesh*Route` definition
- **System resource** - any resource that is not a user resource

### Kuma system resource names

Listeners:
- inbound
  - kuma:envoy:admin
  - _kuma:dynamicconfig
  - listener./tmp/kuma-dp-728637052/kuma-mesh-metric-config.sock
  - listener.0.0.0.0_15001
  - listener.0.0.0.0_15006
  - listener.10.42.0.9_9901
  - listener.[__]_15001 # is it ipv6?
  - probe_listener
  - prometheus_listener
- outbound
  - outbound:passthrough:ipv4
  - outbound:passthrough:ipv6

Clusters:
- access_log_sink
- kuma:envoy:admin
- kuma:metrics:hijacker
- kuma:readiness
- meshtrace_[zipkin|datadog|otel]
- envoy_grpc_streams (ads)

Virtual Hosts:
- _kuma:dynamicconfig
- kuma:envoy:admin

> Routes (not all of them even have a name):

Reviewer 3: ideally all our resources should have a name right?

Author: I'll add a use-case for that

- _kuma:dynamicconfig:/dns
- 9Zuf5Tg79OuZcQITwBbQykxAk2u4fRKrwYn3//AL4Yo= (default route)

#### Other meshes

##### Istio

Istio doesn't seem to be following any naming convention:
- clusters
  - some are in form of [inbound|outbound]|port (like `outbound|9080`)
  - PassthroughCluster / InboundPassthroughCluster
  - BlackHoleCluster
  - prometheus_stats
  - sds-grpc
  - xds-grpc
  - agent
- listeners
  - ip_port
  - virtualOutbound
  - virtualInbound

## Use cases

> ### Looking at a resource name I want to easily relate it to Kuma concepts

Reviewer 3: and understand where it's coming from

### As a user I want to easily exclude all stats related to internal resources from a query

So instead 

``` 
sum:envoy.cluster.upstream_rq.count{!envoy_cluster:kuma_readiness , !envoy_cluster:access_log_sink , !envoy_cluster:meshtrace_datadog}.as_count()
```

we can do:

``` 
sum:envoy.cluster.upstream_rq.count{!envoy_cluster:_kuma*}.as_count()
```

You might be tempted to think that this use case is already covered by the `MeshMetric` profiles, 
and it partially is (the end result is the same) but this use case compliments it by making the profiles easier to implement and maintain.

> It also allows users to do their own filtering easier.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It also allows users to do their own filtering more easily.
```

### As an operator I want to drop all stats related to internal resources

So I can use a processor like:

```yaml
processors:
  filter/drop_kuma_internal_clusters:
    metrics:
      include:
        match_type: regexp
        metric_names: [".*"]  # apply to all metrics
        attributes:
          - key: envoy_cluster
            value: "^_kuma_.*"  # matches if envoy_cluster starts with _
```

### As a Kuma developer I want to have a consistent naming scheme for all resources in Envoy

### As a Kuma developer I want to distinguish between system and user resources in Envoy

### As a Kuma developer I want to distinguish between system resources exposed and not exposed in metrics

> 

Author: Added

## Non use cases

### As a user I want my MeshProxyPatch to continue working after the change

This is not possible.
In MeshProxyPatch you can use `name` matcher to match a resource name but if we change the name of the resource, it will not match anymore.
The feature will be behind a feature flag so that nothing breaks unexpectedly but migration of MeshProxyPatch resources will be required.

## Design

### Prefix system resources using `_kuma_`

All system resources will be prefixed using `_kuma_` prefix (we shouldn't use `_kuma:` because of [this issue](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/2363)).

Resources that can be traced back to a Kuma resource with a valid KRI will have take the form of `_kuma_<KRI>`.

For example:

```
_kuma_kri_mtr_mesh-1__kuma-system_my-meshtrace_
```

Which indicates a system resource that was created for a `MeshTrace` resource.

Resources that are not correlated with any Kuma resource like:

```
kuma:envoy:admin
```

> Will have a prefix `_kuma_` and adhere to the general format rules (not using `:`):

Author: Added a simple way of enforcing these rules by checks in the builders

This is not possible.
In MeshProxyPatch you can use `name` matcher to match a resource name but if we change the name of the resource, it will not match anymore.
The feature will be behind a feature flag so that nothing breaks unexpectedly but migration of MeshProxyPatch resources will be required.

### As a Kuma developer I want to rename resources that are coming from outside Kuma

This is either not possible or very hard.
Envoy can connect to many xDS servers to get configuration from.
If we integrate with systems like Spire (that exposes its own SDS server) we will not be able to rename resources that are coming from there.

See:
- https://github.com/spiffe/spire/blob/f687bf21e812a4bf027d88136032fc46497e7fe0/pkg/agent/endpoints/sdsv3/handler.go#L395
- https://github.com/spiffe/spire/blob/f6a11a0ae03353b3444007ecaa8c81b34931bb49/pkg/agent/endpoints/sdsv3/handler.go#L282
- https://github.com/spiffe/spire/blob/f6a11a0ae03353b3444007ecaa8c81b34931bb49/pkg/agent/endpoints/sdsv3/handler.go#L291
- https://github.com/spiffe/spire/blob/f6a11a0ae03353b3444007ecaa8c81b34931bb49/pkg/agent/endpoints/sdsv3/handler.go#L312

## Design

> ### Use a `^system_[a-z0-9_]+$` regex to name system resources

Author: it's a group of numbers / letters and `_` is outside
